---
title: Lesson 2 - HTML and CSS
layout: post
---

Now that you have gotten some familiarity with HTML and CSS, we can start
laying out the game board for our Tic-Tac-Toe game.

In this lesson, we encourage you to try and find the answers yourself by
reading the documentation. You can find very good documentation for
HTML and CSS on [webplatform.org](http://docs.webplatform.org/wiki/Main_Page).

Tic-Tac-Toe is played on a 3x3 grid. We can create this in HTML using the
HTML `<table>` element. Can you figure out how?

<div class="hidden">
{% highlight html %}
<table>
    <tr><td/><td/><td/></tr>
    <tr><td/><td/><td/></tr>
    <tr><td/><td/><td/></tr>
</table>
{% endhighlight %}
<p class="caption">
The <code>&lt;tr&gt;</code> element is a table row, and the
<code>&lt;td&gt;</code> element is a table cell.
</p>
<button class="show">Show Answer</button>
</div>

If you just put this in the "index.html" file, you probably won't see anything.
This is because, by default, table cells are not given borders.
Another issue is that our table cells are empty, so by default the cells
will have a zero width and height. We can fix both of these issues using CSS.
How would we do that?

<div class="hidden">
{% highlight css %}
td {
    border: 1px solid black;
    width: 100px;
    height: 100px;
}
{% endhighlight %}
<p class="caption">
Note that the selector, <code>td</code>, does not start with a <code>#</code>.
That means the rule does not match based on ID.
Instead, it matches based on the element name.
So this will rule will apply to all <code>&lt;td&gt;</code> elements on the page.
</p>
<button class="show">Show Answer</button>
</div>

Now your table will look something like the following.

<table class="lesson2-table">
    <tr><td/><td/><td/></tr>
    <tr><td/><td/><td/></tr>
    <tr><td/><td/><td/></tr>
</table>

What does the table look like when you put a X or O in the table cell?

<table class="lesson2-table">
    <tr><td>O</td><td/><td/></tr>
    <tr><td/><td>X</td><td/></tr>
    <tr><td/><td/><td/></tr>
</table>

Hmm, not so great. We'd like the X and O to have larger font and be centered.
As we've seen last lesson, we can change the font using the "font-size"
property. But how do we change the alignment?

<div class="hidden">
{% highlight css %}
table {
    font-size: 24pt;
    text-align: center;
}
{% endhighlight %}
<button class="show">Show Answer</button>
</div>

<table id="lesson2-righttext" class="lesson2-table">
    <tr><td>O</td><td/><td/></tr>
    <tr><td/><td>X</td><td/></tr>
    <tr><td/><td/><td/></tr>
</table>

Now we have a nice-looking game grid to use. One last thing though, we should
give each cell a unique ID. This will help us when we are coding the game logic.

<div class="hidden">
{% highlight html %}
<table>
    <tr><td id="00"/><td id="01"/><td id="02"/></tr>
    <tr><td id="10"/><td id="11"/><td id="12"/></tr>
    <tr><td id="20"/><td id="21"/><td id="22"/></tr>
</table>
{% endhighlight %}
<button class="show">Show Answer</button>
</div>

Now that we have the HTML and CSS set up, we can move on to writing the
Javascript in the [next lesson]({{ site.baseurl }}/2014/06/24/lesson-3.html).
